1986- 1st Place in painting. "V Salon UNEAC". Sancti Spiritus, Cuba. Painting Award at the Provincial Encounter of Landscape. Sancti Spiritus, Cuba. 1998- 2nd Place at the Painting Contest of the Civil Aeronautics Institute of Cuba. 2002- January 2003 Digital Color Artist Of The Month. Digital Consciousness Art Database.
Miguel Cerejido is a Canadian artist, born in Havana, Cuba on February the 26th of 1960.
Graduated of Drawing and Painting from the Escuela Nacional de Bellas Artes "San Alejandro" in 1980. He finished a Master Degree in Fine Arts at the Instituto Superior de Arte (I.S.A.) in 1985; he worked as a professor at the Instituto Superior de Diseño Industrial (ISDI), among other art schools in Cuba. He also worked as a specialist at the Centro de "Diseño Ambiental" (Interior Design) in Havana.
He was an active member of the National Union of Writers and Artists of Cuba (UNEAC) since 1995, and of Art Kollectif Media Foundation Inc. in Ottawa, Canada.
Presently he is a member of Arts Ottawa East organization, The Council for the Arts in Ottawa and The Ottawa Art Gallery.
His explorations in painting have always been dealing with the possible nexuses between music and painting as well as, in a very particular way, "Images" that this other artistic discipline produces in his subjectivity.
This theme has been always present in his artistic endeavors from 1983 -while still a student at ISA-, encompassing all his carrier and evolving in many different forms, according to levels of perception in the artist's sensibility and to what is he focusing in his approach to the musical phenomenon.
"The nexus between Music and Painting and ways of pictorially representing sound and silence, have been the main subjects of my work as an artist since 1980. This exploration has many facets from attempts at a pictorial representation of sound, to the creation of environments (maybe places or landscapes) that result from the sensations, feelings, states of mind and/or visions generated by Music. My work has gone through different stages from attempts to illustration of specific musical work to explorations of aspects of the musical structure itself. This is, of course, purely subjective. The final phase of production in my work is distinguished by a return to painting, almost forgotten in my eagerness in use it as a medium instead of a purpose, and the utilization of all I’ve learned through the years about shaping a pictorial – not musical – art work, which held all the spiritual power of music, as an autonomous entity, without moving it away from it’s musical sources by means of referent codes, which, I hope, made possible the identification of the theme by the viewer. The resolution of this process continues to evolve as I grow as an artist and a person. It remains my principal challenge." Miguel Cerejido.
