Iulia Antoanella Motoc is a Romanian international law professor and international expert, now Member of the United Nations Human Rights Committee. Moţoc is a professor at the University of Bucharest, where she holds courses on International law, Human rights, European law. She has also lectured at several Universities, including NYU, Yale University, European University Institute, Florence and UN University, Tokyo. According to "Pladoyer pour les droits de l'homme" she was the youngest UN Special Rapporteur. Iulia Motoc was appointed judge at the Constitutional Court of Romania in 2010.
Born in Timişoara, she graduated from the School of law at the University of Bucharest. Iulia Antoanella Motoc holds a master degree from the Paul Cézanne University, School of Law , Aix-Marseille, a doctorate in international law from Paul Cézanne University, Aix-Marseille (summa cum laude), an habilitation in law from Jean Monnet Department University Paris Sud and doctorate in ethics from the University of Bucharest, Department of Philosophy. Iulia Antoanella Motoc was former member and President of the UN Sub commission on the promotion and protection of Human Rights. She was also UN Special Rapporteur for human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the youngest human Rights of the United Nations (according to "Plaidoyer pour les droits de l'homme"). It this quality she paid special attention to violence against women and children. She visited NYU School of law as a Fulbright scholar co-teaching courses in International Law and Yale Law School as Senior Schell Fellow. She was prized for her academic achievements and elected in the several prestigious academic Boards, ESIL, International Board of Academics and Practitioners Melbourne University, TMC Asser Netherlands, EMA Director, EIUC Venice. She is a UN Special Rapporteur on Human Genome and Human Rights, Member of the Human Rights Committee and Member of the Advisory Committee for the Framework Convention on the Protection on Minorities, Council of Europe. Iulia Antoanella Motoc is an arbiter and conciliator with ICSID Washington.
Iulia Antoanella Motoc is married with the Romanian Ambassador to EU Mihnea Motoc and they have a son, Luca-mihnea.
