Radivoj Korać (Serbian:), sometimes also Radivoje, (November 5, 1938 – June 2, 1969) was a successful Serbian basketball player from Yugoslavia.
Korać was born in Sombor in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. He started playing for BSK (OKK Belgrade) at the age of 16, and played as a left-handed forward-center. Popularly nicknamed "Žućko" ('Blondie'), he became one of the best, if not the best player of Yugoslavia in the 1960s. In 1960 Korać was named as. He was the best scorer of the Yugoslav league for seven seasons, a record.
He entered the Yugoslav national basketball team in 1958 and won five silver and one bronze medal with them, in a total of 157 international games.
Korać played professionally for OKK Beograd, reaching various European champions' competitions with the club. Korać was three times named as part of the best European selection. In a 1964/65 FIBA European Champions Cup first round return game against Swedish champions Alvik from Stockholm, he scored 99 points (the game ended 155-57).
Away from the basketball court, Korać enjoyed theatre, music and reading books. He was a senior undergraduate from the Faculty of Electrical Engineering (ETF) at the University of Belgrade. Surprisingly, he once turned down a contract offer to play with KK Red star.
On June 2, 1969, at the age of 30, Korać died in a car crash in Vogošća, one of the Sarajevo suburbs. In 1971, FIBA established Radivoj Korać Cup in his remembrance, and no basketball games were played in Yugoslavia on June 2 again by decision of the country's Basketball Federation. The Europe-wide Cup folded in 2002. At that time, the basketball federation of Serbia-Montenegro renamed its national cup competition to Radivoj Korać Cup. He was enshrined in the FIBA Hall of Fame in 2007.
Čermak | Ćosić | Cvetković | Daneu | Korać | Rajković | Maroević | Ražnjatović | Skansi | Solman | Plećaš | Zorga | Coach: Žeravica.
Players.
Fragiskos Alvertis • Sergei Belov • Miki Berkovich • Dejan Bodiroga • Wayne Brabender • Juan Antonio Corbalan • Krešimir Ćosić • Mike D'Antoni • Dražen Dalipagić • Predrag Danilović • Mirza Delibašić • Vlade Divac • Aleksandar Đorđević • Nikos Galis • Manu Ginóbili • Saras Jasikevičius • Radivoj Korać • Toni Kukoč • Clifford Luyk • Pierluigi Marzorati • Bob McAdoo • Dino Meneghin • Bob Morse • Aldo Ossola • Theo Papaloukas • Anthony Parker • Dražen Petrović • Dino Rađa • Manolo Raga • Antonello Riva • Emiliano Rodríguez • Arvydas Sabonis • J.A. San Epifanio • Walter Szczerbiak • Panagiotis Yannakis.
Coaches.
Pedro Ferrándiz • Pini Gershon • Alexandar Gomelskiy • Dušan Ivković • Božidar Maljković • Ettore Messina • Aca Nikolić • Željko Obradović • Dan Peterson • Lolo Sainz.
Referees.
Artenik Aradabjian • Mikhail Davidov • Lubomir Kotleba • Yvan Mainini • Costas Rigas.

.
