Ahmet Mesut Yılmaz (Turkish pronunciation:&#160; ; born 6 November 1947 in Istanbul) is the former leader of the Motherland Party (Turkish: , ANAP) and was the Turkish prime minister in the 1990s.
Mesut Yılmaz was a rising star in the Motherland Party of Turgut Özal, representing the Black Sea province of Rize in the parliament and serving as tourism minister in Ozal's cabinet. Upon Özal's election to the presidency in 1989, Yılmaz became the leader of an intraparty opposition to the new Prime Minister, Yıldırım Akbulut.
Yılmaz managed to discharge Akbulut from party leadership and from all executive functions during the biennial party congress in June 1991. Because ANAP had the majority in the parliament he subsequently became Prime Minister of Turkey.
The following years saw a decline in the popularity of the Motherland Party and an acrimonious relationship with Tansu Çiller, leader of the center-right True Path Party (DYP). Yılmaz also made the Motherland Party more business-friendly and Europe-oriented, causing the more conservative, religious wing to switch to the Welfare Party (RP) of Necmettin Erbakan.
His term was marked by the Susurluk scandal, during which he admitted the existence of the JİTEM counter-terrorist Gendarmerie unit. The scandal led to the resignation of his Interior Minister, Mehmet Ağar (a leader of the True Path Party, DYP), following revelations that Abdullah Çatlı, leader of the far-right Grey Wolves organisation, worked for the state. Yılmaz' concerns over his own safety, owing to his support of the Susurluk investigation, led to his briefly carrying a gun in self-defense.
In October 1998, he set off a furor in the Arab world by threatening to "poke out the eyes" of Syria over Hafez al-Assad's alleged support of the separatist Kurdistan Workers' Party.
Yılmaz's last stint as Prime Minister ended in 1999. He continued as a politician, however, serving as a deputy prime minister in a coalition led by Bülent Ecevit from 1999 to 2002. After his failure to win entry into the Grand National Assembly in 2002 elections, Yılmaz retired from politics to pursue a teaching career. After almost 4 years, Yılmaz announced his return to politics in August 2006.
He was charged by the state public prosecutor with corruption during his tenure as prime minister. He was acquitted by the Supreme Court in 2006.
In the 2007 general election he was elected as independent member of parliament from Rize.
 .
 .
