Josh Matlow (born November 27, 1975) is a community activist, journalist, broadcaster and Toronto City Councillor for Ward 22, St. Paul's. He served as a school trustee representing the midtown Toronto riding of St. Paul's between 2003-2010 at the Toronto District School Board. On October 25, 2010, he was elected to Toronto City Hall.
He is a former director of Earthroots, an Ontario environmental non-governmental organization where he worked on achieving protection legislation for the Oak Ridges Moraine - the Oak Ridges Moraine Conservation Act, former campaign organizer for the Canadian Peace Alliance, organizing against the war in Iraq and ran for the Ontario Liberal Party in a 2002 provincial by-election against then-Progressive Conservative Premier Ernie Eves.
Now Magazine describes Matlow as having "a penchant for headlines and right-wing leanings" due to his outspoken opposition to the Toronto District School Board's plan for an Africentric School. Toronto life Magazine describes Matlow as left-wing leaning. and The National Post suggests he's a centrist .
As a Toronto District School Board trustee, he initiated a cell phone ban inside Toronto's public schools, a "Green Grid" project that will see renewable energy generators (such as solar panels) on school rooftops, homework policy reform, campaigned to keep Toronto's school pools open, spoke out against CUPE Ontario’s president, Sid Ryan's comments comparing the Israeli Defense Force to the Nazis, initiated an "Economic Literacy" curriculum to teach students about financial basics like credit cards, budgets and the stock market and campaigned against a proposal to create an Africentric school in Toronto. As a community activist, Matlow has campaigned to preserve green space in Toronto's Mount Pleasant Cemetery and revitalize Yonge-Eglinton Square. In his municipal election campaigns he does not accept donations from either unions or corporations.
As a Toronto city councillor, Matlow initiated a strategic plan for Toronto's seniors and is one of Council's few independents.
Matlow has written articles and columns for the Toronto Sun, Toronto Star, Organic Earth Magazine and Town Crier newspapers, hosted a call-in radio show on University of Toronto station CIUT, was a weekly contributor and co-host on Toronto talk-radio station AM 640 and CFRB. He currently hosts a talk radio show called The City on Toronto radio station Newstalk 1010 every Sunday and is a weekly columnist for the Toronto Star.
.
