Lee Scott (b. 6 April 1956) is a British politician. He is the Conservative Member of Parliament for Ilford North, and an officer of the Conservative Friends of Israel group.
Scott was born in the East End of London to a British Jewish family, .
Scott was educated at Clarke's College, an independent school in Ilford in Essex, which closed in 1978, followed by the London College of Distributive Trades.
From 1972-82, Scott was a Director of Scott &amp; Fishell. He was a sales executive for Toshiba from 1982-4, for ITT from 1984-6, and for NKR from 1986-8. From 1988-98, he was Campaign Director for the United Jewish Israel Appeal.
He became a professional fundraiser for several notable charities, and has also volunteered with Victim Support. He was selected as the Conservative candidate for Waveney in the 2001 general election but failed to win the seat. He has been a councillor on the London Borough of Redbridge for several years.
In the 2005 general election, Scott won the Ilford North seat, ousting the sitting Labour MP Linda Perham. In Parliament he has joined the Cornerstone Group of socially conservative MPs and has also voted consistently to ban smoking in public places.
Scott has a special interest in autism and created history when he presented a Private Member's Bill to Parliament dealing with the care of autistic children once they reached adulthood. He was a member of the Select Committee on transport and is on the Select Committee on Health.
In 2008 Lee Scott was shortlisted for the ePolitix Disability Champion Award - for championing the cause of autism in the House of Commons. Scott, Patron of the UK Autism Foundation, was nominated by the charity for his work supporting parents, carers, children and adults with autism and Asperger syndrome across the United Kingdom. He initiated a landmark debate on autism in 2007 and met with Prime Minister Tony Blair and autism campaigner Ivan Corea after he raised the issue of autism in Prime Minister's Questions.
On December 9th 2010, he abstained from voting on the Higher Tutition Fees Bill, which meant he had to resign his position as an aide to the Transport Secretary, Philip Hammond MP. .
Scott married Estelle Dombey and has three daughters and two sons. He supports Leyton Orient F.C..
