Jarosław Aleksander Kaczyński (Polish pronunciation:&#160; &#160; ; (born 18 June 1949) is a conservative Polish politician who served as Prime Minister from July 2006 to November 2007. He is presently the chairman of the Law and Justice party, which he co-founded in 2002. He has been the leader of the opposition since the 2007 elections.
He has a Doctor of Law degree. He is the identical twin brother of the late Polish president Lech Kaczyński. After the 2007 electoral defeat of PiS, Kaczyński stepped down from office as Prime Minister following the first meeting of the new Sejm.
He ran against Bronisław Komorowski in the Polish presidential election on 20 June 2010, which were called following the death of Lech Kaczyński. Kaczyński announced his candidacy on 26 April 2010, and said he would take the place of his recently deceased brother. He received 36.46% of votes in the first round, while acting president Bronisław Komorowski received 41.54%. In the second round, against Komorowski, he was defeated—receiving 46.99% of the votes, while Komorowski received 53.01% and won.
Kaczyński is the identical twin brother of the late Polish President Lech Kaczyński. Jarosław and Lech were born in Warsaw. The Kaczyński brothers are sons of Rajmund (an engineer who served as a soldier of the Armia Krajowa in World War II and a veteran of the Warsaw Uprising) and Jadwiga (a philologist at the Polish Academy of Sciences). On 11 May 2010, Jarosław Kaczyński said a Russian man saved his grandparents' lives in World War II.
As children, Jarosław and Lech Kaczyński starred in the 1962 Polish film The Two Who Stole the Moon (Polish:), based on a popular children's story by Kornel Makuszyński. Kaczyński resides in Warsaw.
Jarosław Kaczyński was a graduate of law and administration of Warsaw University, which in 1976 awarded him a PhD in Law.
In the 1980s, he became a member of the Solidarity trade union. Kaczyński was the executive editor of the Tygodnik Solidarność weekly in 1989–91.
In 1991, he created the centrist, Christian democratic Centre Agreement party and later became its chairman, remaining in the role until 1998. In the years 1991–3 and 1997–2005 Kaczyński was a member of the Polish Parliament (Sejm).
Kaczyński was the Law and Justice prime ministerial candidate in the September 2005 Polish parliamentary election. However, when the party emerged as winner of the election, he pledged that he would not take the position, expecting that his nomination would reduce the chances of his brother Lech Kaczyński, who was a candidate for the October presidential election.
Kaczyński was the architect of the coalition with the left wing populist Self-Defense of the Republic of Poland (Polish:) and the conservative Christian League of Polish Families party. Party-member Kazimierz Marcinkiewicz was appointed Prime Minister.
In the succeeding months, he was described as a frontbench MP and the leader of his party. Many also described Kaczyński as Poland's most influential politician. He was said to have enormous influence on the Prime Minister's decision-making process.
Following reports of a rift between Kaczyński and Kazimierz Marcinkiewicz, the latter tendered his resignation on 7 July 2006, and Kaczyński was appointed prime minister by the President Lech Kaczyński on 10 July, and officially sworn in on 14 July, following the formation of cabinet and a confidence vote in the Sejm. During Lech Kaczyński's election campaign in 2005, he had pledged that should he win, Jarosław would not become prime minister. Kaczyński's government has also made changes to the tax. At the request of his government, Parliament lowered PIT and rent tax. Kaczyński controversially initiated a nationwide program (lustracja) which required thousands of public employees, teachers, and journalists to formally declare whether or not they had collaborated with the security services of the former communist regime. Kaczyński's government was also criticized both at home and abroad for souring Poland's foreign relationships, particularly with Germany and Russia.
Despite gaining votes, Law and Justice lost the parliamentary election on 21 October 2007, finishing a distant second behind Christian-democratic and conservative liberal Civic Platform. Kaczyński was succeeded as Prime Minister by Donald Tusk, remaining chairman of Law and Justice and becoming leader of the opposition.
Following the death of Lech Kaczyński in a plane crash in Russia, Jarosław announced that he would run for President against Bronisław Komorowski in the upcoming elections. He was running against Bronisław Komorowski in the presidential election, held on 20 June 2010. Kaczyński announced his candidacy on 26 April 2010, and said he would take the place of his recently deceased brother. Some analysts have said Kaczyński has softened his image during the campaign, in order to win centrist voters. On 11 May 2010, he made a televised address to Russia, greeting his 'Russian friends' and praising the millions of Russians who died fighting in World War II. He got 36.46% of the votes in the first round, while acting president Bronisław Komorowski got 41.54%. In the second round, against Komorowski, he was defeated—he got 46.99% of the votes, and Komorowski got 53.01%, which made him the winner.
Ludwik Dorn • Anna Fotyga • Grażyna Gęsicka • Roman Giertych • Przemysław Gosiewski • Wojciech Jasiński • Antoni Jaszczak • Jarosław Kaczyński • Anna Kalata • Stanisław Kluza • Andrzej Lepper • Tomasz Lipiec • Jerzy Polaczek • Zbigniew Religa • Michał Seweryński • Radosław Sikorski • Jan Szyszko • Kazimierz Michał Ujazdowski • Zbigniew Wassermann • Rafał Wiechecki • Piotr Grzegorz Woźniak • Zbigniew Ziobro.
Zyta Gilowska • Andrzej Aumiller • Aleksander Szczygło • Janusz Kaczmarek • Mariusz Błaszczak • Elżbieta Jakubiak • Wojciech Mojzesowicz • Władysław Stasiak • Ryszard Legutko • Mirosław Barszcz • Joanna Kluzik-Rostkowska • Marek Gróbarczyk.
 .
