Forshaw Day (1837–1903) was a Canadian artist known for his landscapes.
Forshaw Day was born in London, England in 1837. He studied architecture and design at the Royal Dublin Society in Dublin, Ireland in 1857. He studied architecture and design at the South Kensington School of Art in London, England. Forshaw Day emigrated to Halifax, Nova Scotia at age 25 in 1862.
He painted pictures and taught painting at the Technological Institute in Halifax, Nova Scotia from 1862-1879. He prepared sets for Garrison theatre productions in Halifax, Nova Scotia. In 1876, Day supplied a panorama, "From Paris to London, " for a professional theatre company. .
He worked as a draftsman at the in H.M. Naval Yard from 1862-79 in Halifax, Nova Scotia. He moved to Kingston, Ontario where he taught freehand drawing at the Royal Military College of Canada from 1879-1897. Day painted in England, Ireland, Switzerland. In Canada, Day painted in the Maritimes, Ontario, British Columbia and the Northwest Territories.
Forshaw Day worked in the late 19th Century, after the Civil War in the United States. Day was elected a member of the Ontario Society of Artists on August 14, 1879. He exhibited his works at the shows of the Royal Canadian Academy of Arts.
In 1901, members of the Royal Military College of Canada Club raised the Forshaw Day Painting Fund in aid of Prof. Forshaw Day, R.C.A., "in consideration of the friendly relations that always existed between him and the Cadets in attendance at the College, and in view of the fact that his circumstances were such as to appeal to the feelings of all those who had met him at Kingston." A number of his Paintings were bought by club members and an oil painting was donated to the College. He died in Kingston, Ontario in 1903.
Forshaw Day's work involved a combination of easel painting, printmaking and graphics. He worked with etching and oil paint. His preferred subjects included landscapes and marine seascapes.
Forshaw Day's work is found in various museums and private collections.
.
Forshaw Island, St Joseph Channel, Algoma, Ontario, Canada was named in honour of late Professor Forshaw Day, Esq., R.C.A sometime Professor of Drawing at the Royal Military College, Kingston c. 1879.
&#160; .
